 Black: R. Teichmann.

        1. P - Q 4                P - Q 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - K B 3
        3. P - B 4                P - K 3
        4. B - Kt 5               B - K 2
        5. Kt - B 3               Q Kt - Q 2
        6. P - K 3                O - O
        7. R - B 1                P - Q Kt 3
        8. P x P                  P x P
        9. B - Kt 5

An invention of my own, I believe. I played it on the spur of the moment
simply to change the normal course of the game. Generally the Bishop goes
to Q 3, or to R 6, after Q - R 4. The text move is in the nature of an
ordinary developing move, and as it violates no principle it cannot be bad.

        9. ........               B - Kt 2
       10. O - O                  P - Q R 3
       11. B - R 4                R - B 1
       12. Q - K 2                P - B 4
       13. P x P                  Kt x P

If P x P; K R - Q 1, and White would play to win one of Black's centre
Pawns. The drawback to the {210} text move is that it leaves Black's Q P
isolated, and consequently weak and subject to attack.

       14. K R - Q 1              Kt x B

The alternative would have been 14...P - Kt 4; 15 B - B 2, P - Kt 5;
16 Kt - Q R 4, Kt (B 4) - K 5.

       15. Kt x Kt                P - Kt 4
       16. R x R                  Q x R
       17. Kt - B 3               Q - B 5

Black aims at the exchange of Queens in order to remain with two Bishops
for the ending, but in this position such a course is a mistake, because
the Bishop at Kt 2 is inactive and cannot come into the game by any means,
unless Black gives up the isolated Queen's Pawn which the Bishop must
defend.

       18. Kt - Q 4

Not, of course, R - Q 4, because of Q x Q; Kt x Q, R - B 1; and there would
be no good way to prevent R - B 7.

       18. ........               Q x Q
       19. Kt (B 3) x Q !

Notice the co-ordination of the Knights' moves. They are manoeuvred
chain-like, so to speak, in order to maintain one of them, either at Q 4 or
ready to go there. Now White threatens to take the open file, and therefore
forces Black's next move.

       19. ........               R - B 1

{211}

[Illustration]

The student should examine this position carefully. There seems to be no
particular danger, yet, as White will demonstrate, Black may be said to be
lost. If the game is not altogether lost, the defence is at least of the
most difficult kind; indeed, I must confess that I can see no adequate
defence against White's next move.

       20. Kt - B 5 !             K - B 1

If 20...B - Q 1; 21 Kt - Q 6, R - B 2; 22 Kt x B, R x Kt; 23 B x Kt, B x B;
24 R x P, R - B 2; 25 R - Q 2, and White is a Pawn ahead. If 20...B moves
anywhere else, then B x Kt, doubling the K B P and isolating all of Black's
King's side Pawns.

       21. Kt x B                 K x Kt
       22. Kt - Q 4               P - Kt 3

This is practically forced, as White threatened Kt - B 5 ch. Notice that
the Black Knight is pinned in such a way that no relief can be afforded
except by giving up the K R P or abandoning the open file {212} with the
Rook, which would be disastrous, as White would immediately sieze it.

       23. P - B 3 !

[Illustration]

       23. ........               P - R 3

Black could do nothing else except mark time with his Rook along the open
file, since as soon as he moved away White would take it. White, on the
other hand, threatens to march up with his King to K 5 via K B 2, K Kt 3,
K B 4, after having, of course, prepared the way. Hence, Black's best
chance was to give up a Pawn, as in the text, in order to free his Knight.

       24. B x P                  Kt - Q 2
       25. P - K R 4              Kt - B 4
       26. B - B 4                Kt - K 3

Black exchanges Knights to remain with Bishops of {213} opposite colours,
which gives him the best chance to draw.

       27. Kt x Kt                K x Kt

27...P x Kt would be worse, as White would then be able to post his Bishop
at K 5.

       28. R - Q 2                R - K R 1

[Illustration]

Black wants to force B - Kt 3. P - K Kt 3 would be bad, on account of
P - Q 5; which would get the Black Bishop into the game, even though White
could answer P - K 4. The text move is, however, weak, as will soon be
seen. His best chance was to play P - Kt 5; and follow it up with P - R 4
and B - R 3. White meanwhile could play P - Kt 4 and R 5, obtaining a
passed Pawn, which, with proper play, should win.

       29. R - Q B 2 !            R - Q B 1
       30. R x R                  B x R

There are now Bishops of opposite colour, but nevertheless White has an
easily-won game. {214}

       31. K - B 2

[Illustration]

       31. ........               P - Q 5

Practically forced. Otherwise the White King would march up to Q 4 and then
to B 5 and win Black's Queen's side Pawns. If Black attempted to stop this
by putting his King at Q B 3 then the White King would enter through K 5
into Black's King's side and win just as easily.

       32. P x P                  K - Q 4
       33. K - K 3                B - K 3
       34. K - Q 3                K - B 3
       35. P - Q R 3              B - B 5 ch
       36. K - K 3                B - K 3
       37. B - R 6

It is better not to hurry P - K Kt 4 because of P - B 4; for although White
could win in any case, it would take longer. Now the White King threatens
to help by going in through K B 4 after posting the Bishop {215} at Kt 7,
where it not only protects the Q P, but indirectly also the Q Kt P.

       37. ........               K - Q 4
       38. B - Kt 7               Resigns.

The student ought to have realised by this time the enormous importance of
playing well every kind of ending. In this game again, practically from the
opening, White aimed at nothing but the isolation of Black's Q P. Once he
obtained that, he tried for and obtained, fortunately, another advantage of
position elsewhere which translated itself into the material advantage of a
Pawn. Then by accurate playing in the ending he gradually forced home his
advantage. This ending has the merit of having been played against one of
the finest players in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

GAME 10. PETROFF DEFENCE

(St. Petersburg, 1914)

White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: F. J. Marshall

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - K B 3
        3. Kt x P                 P - Q 3
        4. Kt - K B 3             Kt x P
        5. Q - K 2                Q - K 2
        6. P - Q 3                Kt - K B 3
        7. B - Kt 5

{216} Played by Morphy, and a very fine move. The point is that should
Black exchange Queens he will be a move behind in development and
consequently will get a cramped game if White plays accurately.

        7. ........               B - K 3

Marshall thought at the time that this was the best move and consequently
played it in preference to Q x Q ch.

        8. Kt - B 3               P - K R 3
        9. B x Kt                 Q x B
       10. P - Q 4                B - K 2
       11. Q - Kt 5 ch            Kt - Q 2
       12. B - Q 3 !

[Illustration]

It is now time to examine the result of the opening. On White's side we
find the minor pieces well posted and the Queen out in a somewhat odd
place, it is true, but safe from attack and actually attacking a Pawn.
{217} White is also ready to Castle. White's position is evidently free
from danger and his pieces can easily manoeuvre.

On Black's side the first thing we notice is that he has retained both his
Bishops, unquestionably an advantage; but on the other hand we find his
pieces bunched together too much, and the Queen in danger of being attacked
without having any good square to go to. The Bishop at K 2 has no freedom
and it blocks the Queen, which, in its turn, blocks the Bishop. Besides,
Black cannot Castle on the King's side because Q x P, R - Kt 1; Q - K 4
threatening mate, wins a Pawn. Nor can he Castle on the Queen's side
because Q - R 5 would put Black's game in imminent danger, since he cannot
play P - R 3 because of B x P; nor can he play K - Kt 1 because of
Kt - Kt 5. Consequently we must conclude that the opening is all in White's
favour.

       12. ........               P - Kt 4

To make room for his Queen, threatening also P - Kt 5.

       13. P - K R 3              O - O

giving up a Pawn in an attempt to free his game and take the initiative. It
was difficult for him to find a move, as White threatened Kt - K 4, and
should Black go with the Queen to Kt 2, then P - Q 5, B - B 4; Kt x P ch,
followed by B x B. {218}

       14. Q x P                  Q R - Kt 1
       15. Q - K 4                Q - Kt 2
       16. P - Q Kt 3             P - Q B 4

In order to break up White's centre and bring his Knight to B 4 and thus
lay the foundation for a violent attack against White's King. The plan,
however, fails, as it always must in such cases, because Black's
development is backward, and consequently his pieces are not properly
placed.

       17. O - O                  P x P
       18. Kt - Q 5 !

A simple move, which destroys Black's plan utterly. Black will now have no
concerted action of his pieces, and, as his Pawns are all weak, he will
sooner or later lose them.

[Illustration]

       18. ........               B - Q 1
       19. B - B 4                Kt - B 4
       20. Q x P                  Q x Q

{219} The fact that he has to exchange Queens when he is a Pawn behind
shows that Black's game is lost.

       21. Kt x Q                 B x Kt
       22. B x B                  B - B 3
       23. Q R - Q 1              B x Kt

The Knight was too threatening. But now the ending brought about is one in
which the Bishop is stronger than the Knight; which makes Black's plight a
desperate one. The game has no further interest, and it is only because of
its value as a study of this variation of the Petroff that I have given it.
Black was able to fight it out until the sixtieth move on account of some
poor play on White's part. The rest of the moves are given merely as a
matter of form.

       24. R x B                  K - Kt 2
       25. B - B 4                R - Kt 3
       26. R - K 1                K - B 3
       27. P - B 4                Kt - K 3
       28. P x P ch               P x P
       29. R - B 1 ch             K - K 2
       30. R - Kt 4               R - K Kt 1
       31. R - B 5                R - B 3
       32. P - K R 4              K R - Q B 1
       33. P x P                  R - B 4
       34. B x Kt                 P x B
       35. R x R                  R x R
       36. P - Kt 6               K - B 1
       37. R - Q B 4              R - Q R 4
  {220}
       38. P - R 4                K - Kt 2
       39. R - B 6                R - Q 4
       40. R - B 7 ch             K x P
       41. R x P                  R - Q 8 ch
       42. K - R 2                P - Q 4
       43. P - R 5                R - Q B 8
       44. R - B 7                R - Q R 8
       45. P - Q Kt 4             R - R 5
       46. P - B 3                P - Q 5
       47. R - B 6                P x P
       48. R x P                  R x Kt P
       49. R - Q R 3              R - Kt 2
       50. P - R 6                R - Q R 2
       51. R - R 5                K - B 3
       52. P - Kt 4               K - K 2
       53. K - Kt 3               K - Q 3
       54. K - B 4                K - B 2
       55. K - K 5                K - Q 2
       56. P - Kt 5               K - K 2
       57. P - Kt 6               K - B 1
       58. K x P                  K - K 1
       59. P - Kt 7               R x P
       60. P - R 7                R - Kt 3 ch
       61. K - B 5                Resigns.

       *       *       *       *       *

{221}

GAME 11. RUY LOPEZ

(St. Petersburg, 1914)

White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: D. Janowski.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - Q B 3
        3. B - Kt 5               P - Q R 3
        4. B x Kt                 Q P x B
        5. Kt - B 3

I played this move after having discussed it with Alechin on several
occasions. Alechin considered it, at the time, superior to P - Q 4, which
is generally played. He played it himself later on in the Tournament, in
one of his games against Dr. E. Lasker, and obtained the superior game,
which he only lost through a blunder.

        5. ........               B - Q B 4

P - B 3 is probably the best move in this position. I do not like the text
move.

        6. P - Q 3                B - K Kt 5
        7. B - K 3                B x B

This opens the K B file for White, and also reinforces his centre, but
Black naturally did not want to make a second move with this Bishop.

        8. P x B                  Q - K 2
        9. O - O                  O - O - O

Bold play, typical of Janowski. {222}

       10. Q - K 1                Kt - R 3

[Illustration]

The problem for White now is to advance his Q Kt P to Kt 5 as fast as he
can. If he plays P - Q Kt 4 at once, Black simply takes it. If he plays
first P - Q R 3 and then P - Q Kt 4, he will still have to protect his
Q Kt P before he can go on and play P - Q R 4 and P - Kt 5. As a matter of
fact White played a rather unusual move, but one which, under the
circumstances, was the best, since after it he could at once play
P - Q Kt 4 and then P - Q R 4 and P - Kt 5.

       11. R - Kt 1 !             P - B 3
       12. P - Kt 4               Kt - B 2
       13. P - Q R 4              B x Kt

He simplifies, hoping to lighten White's attack, which will have to be
conducted practically with only the heavy pieces on the board. He may have
also done it in order to play Kt - Kt 4 and K 3. {223}

       14. R x B

Taking with the Pawn would have opened a possibility for a counter attack.

       14. ........               P - Q Kt 3

He is forced to this in order to avoid the breaking up of his Queen's side
Pawns. The only alternative would have been P - Q Kt 4; which on the face
of it looks bad.

       15. P - Kt 5               B P x P
       16. P x P                  P - Q R 4
       17. Kt - Q 5               Q - B 4
       18. P - B 4

[Illustration]

The White Knight is now a tower of strength. Behind it White will be able
to prepare an attack, which will begin with P - Q 4, to drive away the
Black Queen and thus leave himself free to play P - B 5. There is only one
thing to take care of and that {224} is to prevent Black from sacrificing
the Rook for the Knight and a Pawn.

       18. ........               Kt - Kt 4
       19. R - B 2                Kt - K 3
       20. Q - B 3                R - Q 2

Had White on his 19th move played K R - B 1 instead of R - B 2, Black could
have played now instead of the text move, R x Kt; K P x R, Q x P ch;
followed by Kt - B 4 with a winning game.

       21. R - Q 1                K - Kt 2

It would have been better for Black to play K - Q 1. The text move loses
very rapidly.

       22. P - Q 4                Q - Q 3
       23. R - B 2                P x P
       24. P x P                  Kt - B 5
       25. P - B 5                Kt x Kt
       26. P x Kt                 Q x Q P
       27. P - B 6 ch             K - Kt 1
       28. P x R                  Q x P (Q 2)
       29. P - Q 5                R - K 1
       30. P - Q 6                P x P
       31. Q - B 6                Resigns.

       *       *       *       *       *

{225}

GAME 12. FRENCH DEFENCE

(New York, 1918)

White: J. R. Capablanca. Black: O. Chajes.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 3
        2. P - Q 4                P - Q 4
        3. Kt - Q B 3             Kt - K B 3
        4. B - Q 3

Not the most favoured move, but a perfectly natural developing one, and
consequently it cannot be bad.

        4 ........                P x P

P - Q B 4 is generally played in this case instead of the text move.

        5. Kt x P                 Q Kt - Q 2
        6. Kt x Kt ch             Kt x Kt
        7. Kt - B 3               B - K 2

[Illustration] {226}

        8. Q - K 2

This is played to prevent P - Q Kt 3, followed by B - Kt 2, which is the
general form of development for Black in this variation. If Black now plays
8...P - Q Kt 3; 9. B - Kt 5 ch, B - Q 2; 10. Kt - K 5 and White obtains a
considerable advantage in position.

        8. ........               O - O
        9. B - K Kt 5             P - K R 3

Of course Black could not play P - Q Kt 3 because of B x Kt, followed by
Q - K 4.

       10. B x Kt                 B x B
       11. Q - K 4                P - K Kt 3

This weakens Black's King's side. R - K 1 was the right move.

       12. P - K R 4

[Illustration]

       12. ........               P - K 4

This is merely giving up a Pawn in order to come out quickly with his Q B.
But as he does not obtain {227} any compensation for his Pawn, the move is
bad. He should have played Q - Q 4 and tried to fight the game out that
way. It might have continued thus: 13. Q - B 4, B - Kt 2; 14. Q x B P,
B x P; 15. Kt x B, Q x Kt; 16. O - O - O with considerable advantage of
position for White. The text move might be considered a mild form of
suicide.

       13. P x P                  B - B 4
       14. Q - K B 4              B x B
       15. O - O - O              B - Kt 2
       16. R x B                  Q - K 2
       17. Q - B 4

In order to keep the Black Queen from coming into the game.

       17. ........               Q R - Q 1
       18. K R - Q 1

A better plan would have been to play R - K 1, threatening P - K 6.

       18. ........               R x R
       19. R x R                  R - K 1
       20. P - B 3                P - Q B 3

Of course if B x P; Kt x B, Q x Kt; R - K 3. Black with a Pawn minus fights
very hard.

       21. R - K 3

The Pawn had now to be defended after Black's last move, because after
B x P; Kt x B, Q x Kt; {228} R - K 3, Black could now play Q - Kt 1
defending the Rook.

       21. ........               P - Q B 4
       22. K - B 2                P - Kt 3
       23. P - R 4

White's plan now is to _fix_ the Queen's side in order to be able to
manoeuvre freely on the other side, where he has the advantage of material.

       23. ........               Q - Q 2
       24. R - Q 3                Q - B 1
       25. Q - K 4                Q - K 3
       26. R - Q 5                K - B 1
       27. P - B 4                K - Kt 1

[Illustration]

Black sees that he now stands in his best defensive position, and therefore
waits for White to show how he intends to break through. He notices, of
course, that the White Knight is in the way of the K B P, which cannot
advance to K B 4 to defend, or support rather, the Pawn at K 5. {229}

       28. P - Q Kt 3             K - B 1
       29. K - Q 3                K - Kt 1
       30. R - Q 6                Q - B 1
       31. R - Q 5                Q - K 3
       32. P - K Kt 4             K - B 1
       33. Q - B 4                K - Kt 1
       34. Q - K 4                K - B 1

[Illustration]

Black persists in waiting for developments. He sees that if P - K R 5,
P x P; P x P, the Queen goes to R 6, and White will have to face serious
difficulties. In this situation White decides that the only course is to
bring his King to K Kt 3, so as to defend the squares K R 3 and K Kt 4,
where the Black Queen might otherwise become a source of annoyance.

       35. K - K 2                K - Kt 1
       36. K - B 1                K - B 1
       37. K - Kt 2               K - Kt 1
       38. K - Kt 3               K - B 1

{230}

Now that he has completed his march with the King, White is ready to
advance.

[Illustration]

       39. P - K R 5              P x P

39...P - K Kt 4 would be answered by Q - B 5, with a winning game.

       40. P x P                  Q - K 2

Against K - Kt 1; White would play Q - Kt 4, practically forcing the
exchange of Queens, after which White would have little trouble in winning
the ending, since Black's Bishop could not do much damage in the resulting
position.

       41. Q - B 5                K - Kt 1

Black overlooks the force of 42 R - Q 7. His best defence was R - Q 1;
against which White could either advance the King or play Kt - R 4,
threatening Kt - Kt 6 ch.

       42. R - Q7                 B x P ch

{231}

This loses a piece, but Black's position was altogether hopeless.

       43. K - Kt 4               Q - B 3
       44. Kt x B                 Q - Kt 2 ch
       45. K - B 4                Resigns.

The interest of this game centres mainly on the opening and on the march of
the White King during the final stage of the game. It is an instance of the
King becoming a fighting piece, even while the Queens are still on the
board.

       *       *       *       *       *

GAME 13. RUY LOPEZ

(New York, 1918)

White: J. S. Morrison. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

        1. P - K 4                P - K 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - Q B 3
        3. B - Kt 5               P - Q 3
        4. Kt - B 3               B - Q 2
        5. P - Q 4                P x P
        6. Kt x P                 P - K Kt 3

In this form of defence of the Ruy Lopez the development of the K B via
Kt 2 is, I think, of great importance. The Bishop at Kt 2 exerts great
pressure along the long diagonal. At the same time the position of the
Bishop and Pawns in front of the King, once it is Castled, is one of great
defensive strength. Therefore, in this form of development, the Bishop,
{232} we might say, exerts its maximum strength (Compare this note with the
one in the Capablanca-Burn game at San Sebastian, page 197.)

        7. Kt - B 3               B - Kt 2
        8. B - Kt 5               Kt - B 3

Of course not K Kt - K 2; because of Kt - Q 5. The alternative would have
been P - B 3; to be followed by K Kt - K 2; but in this position it is
preferable to have the Kt at K B 3.

        9. Q - Q 2                P - K R 3
       10. B - K R 4

An error of judgment. White wants to keep the Knight pinned, but it was
more important to prevent Black from Castling immediately. B - K B 4 would
have done this.

       10. ........               O - O
       11. O - O - O

Bold play, but again faulty judgment, unless he intended to play to win or
lose, throwing safety to the winds. The Black Bishop at Kt 2 becomes a very
powerful attacking piece. The strategical disposition of the Black pieces
is now far superior to White's, therefore it will be Black who will take
the offensive.

       11. ........               R - K 1
       12. K R - K 1

{233}

[Illustration]

White wanted to keep his Q R on the open file, and consequently brings over
his other Rook to the centre to defend his K P, which Black threatened to
win by P - K Kt 4, followed by Kt x P.

       12. ........               P - Kt 4 !

Now that the K R is in the centre, Black can safely advance, since, in
order to attack on the King's side, White would have to shift his Rooks,
which he cannot do so long as Black keeps up the pressure in the centre.

       13. B - Kt 3               Kt - K R 4

Uncovering the Bishop, which now acts along the long diagonal, and at the
same time preventing P - K 5, which would be answered by Kt x B; P x Kt,
Kt x P; etc., winning a Pawn.

       14. Kt - Q 5               P - R 3

Black drives the Bishop away so as to _unpin_ his pieces and be able to
manoeuvre freely. {234}

       15. B - Q 3                B - K 3

Preparing the onslaught. Black's pieces begin to bear against the King's
position.

       16. P - B 3

[Illustration]

With the last move White not only blocks the action of Black's K B, but he
also aims at placing his Bishop at Q Kt 1 and his Queen at Q B 2, and then
advancing his K P, to check at K R 7.

       16. ........               P - B 4 !

Initiating an attack to which there is no reply, and which has for its
ultimate object either the winning of the White Q B or cutting it off from
the game. (Compare this game with the Winter-Capablanca game at Hastings.)

       17. P - K R 4              P - B 5

The Bishop is now out of action. White naturally counter attacks violently
against the seemingly {235} exposed position of the Black King, and, with
very good judgment, even offers the Bishop.

[Illustration]

       18. P x P !                P x P !

Taking the Bishop would be dangerous, if not actually bad, while the text
move accomplishes Black's object, which is to put the Bishop out of action.

       19. R - R 1                B - B 2
       20. K - Kt 1

This move unquestionably loses time. Since he would have to retire his
Bishop to R 2 sooner or later, he might have done it immediately. It is
doubtful, however, if at this stage of the game it would be possible for
White to save the game.

       20. ........               Kt - K 4
       21. Kt x Kt                R x Kt

It was difficult to decide which way to retake. I {236} took with the Rook
in order to have it prepared for a possible attack against the King.

       22. B - R 2                Kt - B 3

Now that the White Bishop has been driven back, Black wants to get rid of
White's strongly posted Knight at Q 5, which blocks the attack of the
Bishop at B 2. It may be said that the Knight at Q 5 is the key to White's
defence.

[Illustration]

       23. P - Kt 3

White strives not only to have play for his Bishop, but also he wants to
break up Black's Pawns in order to counter-attack. The alternative would
have been 23 Kt x Kt ch, Q x Kt; and Black would be threatening R - R 4,
and also Q - K 3. The student should notice that Black's drawback in all
this is the fact that he is playing minus the services of his Q R. It is
this fact that makes it possible for White to hold out longer. {237}

       23. ........               Kt x P
       24. B x Kt                 R x B
       25. P x P                  P - B 3

[Illustration]

       26. Kt - K 3

Kt - Kt 4 was the alternative, but in any event White could not resist the
attack. I leave it to the reader to work this out for himself, as the
variations are so numerous that they would take up too much space.

       26. ........               Q - R 4
       27. P - B 4                Q x Q
       28. R x Q                  P x P
       29. Kt - Kt 4              B - Kt 3

This forces the King to the corner, where he will be in a mating net.

       30. K - R 1                Q R - K 1

Now at last the Q R enters into the game and soon the battle is over.

       31. P - R 3

If R x P, R - K 8 ch; R - Q 1, R (K 1) - K 7. {238}

       31. ........               R - K 8 ch
       32. R x R                  R x R ch
       33. K - R 2                B - B 2
       34. K - Kt 3               P - Q 4

the quickest way to finish the game.

       35. B x P                  P x P ch
       36. K - Kt 4               P - B 6
       37. P x P                  R - K 5 ch
       38. P - B 4                R x P ch
       39. K - R 5                R x B
       40. R - Q 8 ch             K - R 2
       41. R - Q 7                B - K 3
            Resigns.

A very lively game.

       *       *       *       *       *

GAME 14. QUEEN'S GAMBIT DECLINED

(New York, 1918)

White: F. J. Marshall. Black: J. R. Capablanca.

        1. P - Q 4                P - Q 4
        2. Kt - K B 3             Kt - K B 3
        3. P - B 4                P - K 3
        4. Kt - B 3               Q Kt - Q 2
        5. B - Kt 5               B - K 2
        6. P - K 3                O - O
        7. R - B 1                P - B 3

This is one of the oldest systems of defence against the Queen's Gambit. I
had played it before in this Tournament against Kostic, and no doubt
Marshall expected it. At times I change my defences, {239} or rather
systems of defence; on the other hand, during a Tournament, if one of them
has given me good results, I generally play it all the time.

        8. Q - B 2                P x P
        9. B x P                  Kt - Q 4
       10. B x B                  Q x B
       11. O - O                  Kt x Kt
       12. Q x Kt                 P - Q Kt 3

This is the key to this system of defence. Having simplified the game
considerably by a series of exchanges, Black will now develop his Q B along
the long diagonal without having created any apparent weakness. The proper
development of the Q B is Black's greatest problem in the Queen's Gambit.

       13. P - K 4                B - Kt 2
       14. K R - K 1              K R - Q 1

[Illustration]

The developing stage can now be said to be complete on both sides. The
opening is over and the middle-game begins. White, as is generally the
case, has {240} obtained the centre. Black, on the other hand, is
entrenched in his first three ranks, and if given time will post his Q R at
Q B 1 and his Knight at K B 3, and finally play P - Q B 4, in order to
break up White's centre and give full action to the Black Bishop posted at
Q Kt 2. In this game White attempts to anticipate that plan by initiating
an advance on the centre, which, when carefully analysed, is truly an
attack against Black's K P.

       15. P - Q 5                Kt - B 4 !

Against Kostic in a previous game I had played Kt - B 1. It was
carelessness on my part, but Marshall believed differently, otherwise he
would not have played this variation, since, had he analysed this move, he
would, I think, have realised that Black would obtain an excellent game.
Black now threatens not only B P x P; but also Kt x P; followed by B P x P.
The position is very interesting and full of possibilities.

[Illustration] {241}

       16. P x K P                Kt x P (K 3)
       17. B x Kt                 Q x B

played under the impression that White had to lose time in defending his
Q R P, when I could play P - Q B 4, obtaining a very superior game. But, as
will be seen, my opponent had quite a little surprise for me.

       18. Kt - Q 4 !

[Illustration]

       18. ........               Q - K 4 !

Of course, if 18...Q x R P; 19 R - R 1 would win the Queen. The text move
is probably the only satisfactory move in the position. The obvious move
would have been Q - Q 2 to defend the Q B P, and then would have come
19 Kt - B 5, P - B 3; 20 Q - K Kt 3 (threatening Q R - Q 1), K - R 1;
21 Q R - Q 1, Q - K B 2; 22 P - K R 4, with a tremendous advantage in
position. The text move, on the other hand, assures Black an even game at
the very least, as will soon be seen. {242}

       19. Kt x P                 Q x Q
       20. R x Q                  R - Q 7
       21. R - Kt 1

A very serious error of judgment. White is under the impression that he has
the better game, because he is a Pawn ahead, but that is not so. The
powerful position of the Black Rook at Q 7 fully compensates Black for the
Pawn minus. Besides, the Bishop is better with Rooks than the Knight (see
pages 48-56, where the relative values of the Knight and Bishop are
compared), and, as already stated, with Pawns on both sides of the board
the Bishop is superior because of its long range. Incidentally, this ending
will demonstrate the great power of the Bishop. White's best chance was to
take a draw at once, thus. 21 Kt - K 7 ch K - B 1; 22 R - B 7 R - K 1 (not
B x P; because P - B 3 would give White the best of it); 23 R x B (best;
not Kt - Kt 6 ch, because of B P x Kt; followed by R x K P), R x Kt;
24 R - Kt 8 ch, R - K 1; 25 R x R ch, K x R, and with proper play White
will draw.

It is curious that, although a Pawn ahead, White is the one who is always
in danger. It is only now, after seeing this analysis, that the value of
Black's 18th move Q - K 4 can be fully appreciated.

       21. ........               R - K 1

With this powerful move Black begins, against White's centre, an assault
which will soon be shifted against {243} the King itself. White is afraid
to play 22 P - B 3 because of P - B 4.

       22. P - K 5                P - K Kt 4

To prevent P - B 4. The White Knight is practically pinned, because he does
not dare move on account of R x K P.

[Illustration]

       23. P - K R 4

This is a sequel to the previous move. White expects to disrupt Black's
Pawns, and thus make them weak.

       23. ........               P x P

Though doubled and isolated this Pawn exercises enormous pressure. Black
now threatens R - K 3; to be followed by R - Kt 3 and P - R 6 and R 7 at
the proper time.

       24. R - K 1

White cannot stand the slow death any longer. {244} He sees danger
everywhere, and wants to avert it by giving up his Queen's side Pawns,
expecting to regain his fortunes later on by taking the initiative on the
King's side.

       24. ........               R - K 3 !

Much better than taking Pawns. This forces White to defend the Knight with
the Rook at K 1, because of the threat R - Kt 3.

       25. R (K1) - Q B 1         K - Kt 2

Preparatory to R - Kt 3. The game is going to be decided on the King's
side, and it is the isolated double Pawn that will supply the finishing
touch.

       26. P - Q Kt 4             P - Kt 4

To prevent P - Kt 5, defending the Knight and liberating the Rooks.

       27. P - R 3                R - Kt 3
       28. K - B 1                R - R 7

[Illustration] {245}

Notice the remarkable position of the pieces. White cannot move anything
without incurring some loss. His best chance would have been to play
29 P - K 6, but that would only have prolonged the game, which is lost in
any case.

       29. K - Kt 1               P - R 6
       30. P - Kt 3               P - Q R 3

Again forcing White to move and to lose something thereby, as all his
pieces are tied up.

[Illustration]

       31. P - K 6                R x K P

Not even now can White move the Knight because of P - R 7 ch; K x P,
R - R 3 ch; K - Kt 1, R - R 8 mate.

       32. P - Kt 4               R - R 3
       33. P - B 3

If 33 P - Kt 5, P - R 7 ch; 34 K - R 1, R x Kt; 35 R x R, R x P, winning
easily. {246}

       33. ........               R - Q 3
       34. Kt - K 7               R (Q3) - Q 7
       35. Kt - B 5 ch            K - B 3
       36. Kt - R 4               K - Kt 4
       37. Kt - B 5               R - Kt 7 ch
       38. K - B 1                P - R 7
       39. P - B 4 ch             K x B P
       40. Resigns.

An ending worth very careful study.

       *       *       *       *       *
